# Collaborative composition vignette #2

## Background

The three of us are in the middle of a piece for solo guitar. The piece has two
main sections with a hard silence in between. The total duration is about 15
minutes. The first half lasts about 10 minutes, the second half about 5
minutes. We've decided that the end of the first half should close with about a
minute and a half of two- or three-voice polyphony. It's Monday morning. We've
given ourselves all of Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday together in our shared
studio space to compose the minute and a half of polyphony. The guitarist will
come to our studio on Thursday to give feedback and play through the material.

## Goal

Author a work plan for the three of us for Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday.
Reference different types of compositional work. Reference different
technologies (remembering that paper and pencil is just as much a technology as
a scripting language or a 3D printer). Show what parts of the process can and
should be collaborative.

## Work plan

### MON 09 - 12:

Compose sonorities individually.

### MON 13 - 17:

Present sonorities, analyze collectively.

### TUE 09 - 12:

Review sonorities from previous day, discuss character of rhythmic skeleton to
map sonorities over.

### TUE 13 - 17:

Review rhythmic swatches from studio library collectively (composed and
archived during earlier work sessions on other projects), auditioning various
sonority applications across different rhythmic constructions according to
simple counterpoint rules (also retrieved from the studio library). The goal
here is to reach consensus on the overall character of the passage under
consideration. Discuss improvements and adjustments to the counterpoint rules
retrieved from the studio library.

### WED 09 - 12:

Present and compare different potential polyphonic rhythmic skeletons, composed
by Jeff and Josiah during the previous evening, combined with adjustments to
the counterpoint rules made by Trevor. We agree to use alternating groups of
measures from Josiah and Jeff's best attempts, although these result in some
unexpected counterpoint results, which Trevor decides is simplest to resolve by
hand.

### WED 13 - 17:

After lunch, we review the previously settled-upon rhythm and pitch framework,
auditioning the audio and notation repeatedly, making fine-tuning adjustments.
At this point we quickly work in some simple articulations and dynamics, with
the intent that they be revised after our guitarist reviews the passage on
Thursday.