Collaborative composition vignette #1

**Background.** The three of us are in the middle of a piece for solo guitar.
The piece has two main sections with a hard silence in between. The total
duration is about 15 minutes. The first half lasts about 10 minutes, the second
half about 5 minutes. We've decided that the end of the first half should close
with about a minute and a half of two- or three-voice polyphony. It's Monday
morning. We've given ourselves all of Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday together in
our shared studio space to compose the minute and a half of polyphony. The
guitarist will come to our studio on Thursday to give feedback and play through
the material.

**Goal.** Author a workplan for the three of us for Monday, Tuesday and
Wednesday. Reference different types of compositional work. Reference different
technologies (remembering that paper and pencil is just as much a technology as
a scripting language or a 3D printer). Show what parts of the process can and
should be collaborative.

**Workplan.**

Monday 9 am - lunch: Jeff improvises verticalities at the MIDI grand piano. The
MIDI grand piano is equipped with transcription software. The transcription
software is only moderately good but works fine for verticalities. A
transcription user interface exists. This means that Jeff is able selectively
to transcribe verticalities as he finds ones that he likes, making the
notated output of the transcription session more targetted and less filled with
noise. Josiah and Trevor sit in the transcription studio with Jeff and watch
silently as Jeff improvises. The point is for a type of witnessing that is not
yet discursive: we want to know where Jeff's fingers, heart and mind traveled
en route to producing the resulting set of verticalities. But we don't yet want
in any way to influence the paths that his work will take. Shortly before noon
Jeff prints out two or three sheets of paper covered in verticalities. We'll
say this totals something like 62 chords. We take the print-outs with us to the
Indian restaurant on the corner for lunch and debriefing.

Monday 1 pm - 6 pm: The three of us head back to our office and we each
independently elaborate examples of the verticalities produced from the
morning's improvisation / transcription session. We're free to elaborate any
of the 62 starting sonorities that we please, according to any method we think
will help. Jeff works by loading all 62 sonorities into modeling software and
trying out different transformations on some or all of the 62 sonorities at
once. Jeff finds three different transformations (that we won't detail here but
that are fun to imagine) that produce interesting results; this results in
three more sets of 62 sonorities. Josiah plays through the 62 starting
sonorities and resonates strongly with 15 of the sonorities. Josiah loads each
of these 15 chosen sonorities into modeling software and runs transformations
on each. Josiah's output results in a new collection of 29 sonorites. Trevor
filters through the 62 start sonorities and finds three sonorities that seem
particularly rich. Trevor spends the afternoon improvising on just those three
sonorities at the MIDI piano. The result is a collection of 20 new
sonorities that are all tightly related to the three that attracted Trevor's
attention. We print out our results and tape them to the wall of the main room
in the office. Everyone takes a look at everyone else's work before heading
home. We save discussion and comparison for tomorrow.

Tuesday 9 am - lunch: We come into the office and return to the main room. The
original set of 62 sonorities is taped to the wall. So are three new sets of 62
(authored by Jeff), a new set of 15 (authored by Josiah) and a new set of 20
(authored by Trevor). We present our work in turn. We play through the
sonorities in each set. And we explain the formal (and intuitive) methods we
used to do our work. We play and discuss until we reach a point of consensus as
to the most interesting sonorities we've produced. We also have a good sense as
to how some of the sonorities can lead to each other and away from each other.
In the end we select 8 sonorities we'll use as harmonic fields to support the
writing of the minute and half of polyphony. The order of the sonorities is
fixed. We engraver the 8 sonorities on a single sheet of paper, together with
comments about how we built the chords, how the chords relate to each other and
why we put the chords in the order that we did.

Tuesday 1 pm - 3 pm: We come back from lunch and meet in the main room of the
office for a discussion about the melodic profile of the polyphony we'd like to
write. What will be the global series of tempi for the minute and half of
music? Will there be ritardandi or accelerandi that will stretch whatever lines
we write? Will the intervallic content of the lines be more-or-less serial,
modal, tonal or purposefully constructed of only one or two intervals? Will we
distinguish the two or three different voices by dynamics, by timbre by rhythm,
by register? We decide we'd like the bulk of the section to comprise two
voices, with occasional islands of only one voice or a total of three voices.
We decide that interval content will be freely determined by visiting each of
the 8 pitch fields in order. We also decide that the two main voices will be
more or less rhythmically equal to one another but that the first voice will be
higher and quieter than the second voice (which will then be lower and louder).
We finally decide to forestall discussion about timbre until later in the
process.

Tuesday 3 pm - 6 pm: We return to our three separate desks. We each begin the
process of writing two voices of polyphony by ourselves. Jeff does the work at
the piano. Josiah builds and solves a constraint problem. Trevor does the work
by hand at the desk. At the end of the day each of us posts our work on the
wall of the main room in the office. We look over each other's work to prime
discussion for tomorrow. But we have discussion and evaluation for tomorrow
morning.

Wednesday 9 am - lunch: We come into the office and return to the main room.
Our work is still taped to the walls from last night. We each present and
discuss our work, playing examples as sound files and also playing at the
piano. Each of us have effective regions in our work. And it's clear where each
of us enters a new harmonic region determined by the next of the 8 pitch
fields. This 8-part division provides a type of jointing of our counterpoint
that allows us to try to take best of breed from each of our examples. We make
it partway through this process and go to lunch.

Wednesday 1 pm - 6 pm: TBD.