New music, new technologies: a composers' assessment of the collaborative potential of new communication and production technologies
====================================================================================================================================

The three of us work as both composers and technologists every day: we write
our music in ways that are deeply informed by practices drawn from the
engineering disciplines and, at the same time, we bring the perspectives of our
work as composers to the ways we develop and evaluate new music technologies.
As lead developers of Abjad -- an object-oriented and open-source API for the
formalized control of music notation that extends the widely used Python
programming language and that has now been downloaded thousands of times by
composers all around the world -- we have had years to reflect on the ways that
computing technologies both help and hinder our work as artists. Our concerns
range from the technical (how can the interface to a class be optimized to
express the ways that rhythmic augmentation dots work in conjunction with
differently shaped noteheads?) to the properly social (what are the ways that
consumer computing technologies exert their alien pull on our work as artists
and what strategies do we have in place to subvert these tendencies of new
technology?). Here we turn our attention to the things that our work as
composers and technologists tells us about the ways that the collaborative
potential of music composition intersects the new communication and production
technologies now avilable to us. Under what circumstances is music composition
collaborative? Which of the new technoloiges that now surround us hold the
potential to amplify the collaborative parts of our work as composers? And how
do we navigate the differences between the technologies that help us produce
our work and those that help us facilitate our increasingly global
relationships with collaborators? These are the types of questions we consider
below.