Music composition and the technologies of working together: towards an assessment of technology's impact on the structure and incidence of collaborative music composition
==========================================================================================================================================================================

How are collaborative efforts at music composition impacted by the increasing availability of technology? And how is the relationship between composerly collaboration and technology likely to develop in the future?

Attempts at an answer depend on which technologies we mean when we ask the question and, crucially, on what we imagine composerly collaboration to be. In the paragraphs that follow we consider the status of collaborative work in music composition. Then we turn our attention to the ways that the increasing availability of technology stands to impact this work. Our reflections will taxonomize collaborative work by disciplinary orientation and classify technologies according to design. Supplied with this pair of distinctions -- the first based on types of collaborative work and the second based on the likely applications of technology -- we sketch a vision of collaboration in music composition that celebrates the social aspects of collaborative work over and above the development of new technologies, whether in the arts or elsewhere.

The three of us work as both composers and technologists every day. We write our music in ways that are informed by practices drawn from software engineering. And we bring the perspectives of our work as composers to the way we develop the technologies we use in our own music and that we make available to other composers. As the primary developers of Abjad -- an open-source, object-oriented API for the formalized control of music notation that extends the widely used Python programming language and that has now been downloaded thousands of times by composers all around the world -- we have a position overlapping both the arts and engineering from which to reflect on the ways that computing technologies both help and hinder our work as artists. Our concerns range from the technical (how can the interface to a class be optimized to express the ways that rhythmic augmentation dots work in conjunction with differently shaped noteheads?) to the properly social (what are the ways that consumer computing technologies exert their alien pull on our work as artists and what strategies do we have in place to subvert these tendencies of new technology?). It is from this perspective that we pause to reflect on the nature of collaboration in music composition generally. When is music composition collaborative? Are we able to discern different types of composerly collaboration? And what does collaborative work in music composition look like?

Cases of composerly collaboration almost always bring the composer together not with other composers but with practitioners of allied disciplines. Opera is certainly one of the clearest -- and most historically reified -- examples. Opera joins composer, conductor, librettist, singers and players with managers, marketers and a whole chain of financial functionaries necessary to underwrite the production as it is readied for stage. Dancers and stage and lighting directors extend the project further. And, indeed, the number of roles allowed by operatic production can probably be multiplied indefinitely. Opera has always been collaborative and the composer has always occupied a central position in the production. And this joining together of agents from such an array of different practices points to the inherently transdisciplinary nature of opera and the composer's role in its production. But note that what is almost never the case is the production of an opera authored by more than one composer. There are cases of composers completing each other's scores, both operatic and otherwise, especially posthumously. But the composer's role in the overwhelming majority of cases of operatic production, both at the present moment and in the past, is essentially a unary role embedded in some larger transciplinary collaboration.

Is there something inherent in the nature of opera that embeds the composer alone in the middle of a social network of collaborators taken from other disciplines? The role of the composer as film scorer recapitulates everything we observe in opera. And the coproduction of songs further convinces us of the transdisplinary nature of compositional collaboration when we think of the composer at one desk and the lyricist at the next, toiling in moonlighting stints at a hotel, knocking off song after song. Here we find the composer embedded in an intimate social network of only two collaborators. But only one composer. And only in collaboration across disciplines rather than within them. 

Is there room to imagine collaboration within composition rather than collaboration across the boundaries of composition? Two composers sitting at the same desk co-creating the details of the same score at more or less the same time is almost unattested. Such composer-to-composer collaboration would constitute a type of intradisciplinary collaboration in music composition. But intradisciplinary composition is not at all what we find when we reflect on composerly collaboration. What we find instead are overwhelmingly cases of transdisciplinarity in music composition. 

We're not sure why this is the case. The historical and continued persistence of transciplinarity in preference to intradisciplinarity in compositional collaboration is at least something of a mystery. The baggage left over from Romanticism surely continues to prop up an outdated ideal of the (necessarily lone) composer-genius. But the shadow of Romanticism, no matter how it intersects the impenetrability of contemporary commodification, can't explain the norm of the lone composer embedded transcriplinarily in the production of the stage works of, say, the Renaissance or the Baroque. There's the very real possibility that composers have avoided composer-to-composer collaboration simply for reasons of not wanting to collaborate in such a way. The production of paintings and novels tends to exhibit the same pattern of lone authorship we observe in music composition. And so perhaps the preference for lone authorship is a creative preference that (whether the result of varied types of elitism or not) is not merely the baggage of Romanticism but in fact a a well-attested pattern in our creative history. We are probably forced to admit that this is at least partially the case. 

But in the present moment we feel that something substantial has changed. Decades after the (discourse of the) death of the author and the beginnings of the first attempts to take seriously emergent types of political pluralism, we detect a manifest desire on the part of very many creators in all media to interrogate the older patterns of production and try out newer ones in their place. In the domain of musical production we observe that producer-to-producer collaboration in the creation of electronica is not at all uncommon. Sending samples back and forth across the Internet has benefitted DJs and producers enormously. And indeed one of the collateral benefits of the rise of fixed media generally would appear to be cases of precisely this sort of intradiscipliarity for which we search mostly in vain in composition proper. And the persistence of the terms "composer" and "producer" as distinct from one another is telling. The culture continues to designate as composers those who author musical score destined for live performance while reserving the term producer for those working in the fixed-media creation of audio: celebrated cases of producer-to-producer intradisciplinarity are common enough while corresponding cases of composer-to-composer intradisciplinarity are still very much exceptions to the persistence of a cultural norm.

Before leaving our reflections on the types of composerly collaboration and their distribution we would like to suggest one further -- and largely unacknolwedged -- reason that composer-to-composer collaboration may occur so infrequently. The reason has to do with the nature of music notation in itself. Our experience implementing Abjad as a type of object-oriented interface to the structure of musical score has convinced us of the complexity of modeling music notation as a coherent system. The fact that children can read and write music notation competently attests to the systematic nature of at least the primary features of music notation. But generalizing those systematic qualities into a coherent formal model is a much more complex task. What type of model best exhibits the understanding of music horizontally and vertically at the same time? What type of context must be modeled to spell accidentals correctly according to composers' manifestly different uses of pitch? Are measures to be modeled as containers of content or demarcators of musical time? What are the semantics of beams, ties and the other details of rhythmic notation in nonmetric musics? These are nontrivial considerations that have bedeviled the authors of the various music notation and composition systems now available. And so we offer the possibility that a largely unacknoweldged attenuator of intradisciplinary collaboration in music composition may be the difficulty of producing a computational model of music notation in itself. DJs and producers may find it as convenient as it is to send audio files over the Internet -- and then iteratively to modify and resend such files -- precisely because our current cultural understanding of what digital audio *is* is remarkably simpler than any corresponding model of music notation.

###

We now turn our attention to the intersection of technology and composerly
collaboration. We will find it helpful to distinguish between technologies
composers use to create score from the technologies composers use primarily to
communicate with collaborators. Artists can and do creatively subject
technologies of all types to purposes for which they were never anticipated, a
fact which renders moot any hard-and-fast taxonomy of technologies applied to
the production of art. But it is possible at least in the speculative case to
separate out content-creation technologies in the former case from
communications technologies in the latter.

Which are the content-creation technologies of music composition? Probabaly
music notation and engraving packages. Conceivably also computer-assissted
composition software. Any number of online resources for orchestration,
instrumentation or whatever else might also be of service in a composer's work
on a given project. The collection of content-creation technologies applicable
to composition will never be a closed set. But content-creation technologies
conceived of in this way can be set in contradistinction to the communications
technologies composers use to work and meet with collaborators: voice and video
calling, email, any number of messaging services and social media of all sorts.

A number of distinctions suggest themselves between these two types of
technology. Perhaps the most important of these being that content-creation
technologies are generally designed with a model of some sort of real-world
artifact in mind while communications technologies specify the format of
information without any model as to the meaning of content. Content-creation
software for use in publishing almost certainly implements a model of a book,
magazine or other artifact, as well as a formal definition of a page and the
layout of information on it, the ways that pages relate and the rules governing
the attributes and behaviors of text and graphics; such an application must
also define what happens when users change or update any of the things included
in the model. Content-creation software for use in composition must function
analogously. At minimum we would expect a model of musical score that defines
the layout and contents of a page, the structure of a musical voice, the way
that voices may start and stop, the differences between the written and
sounding pitches of transposing instruments, and so on. All of which stands in
contrast to the design of the communications software the composer then uses to
send a digital copy of a score excerpt to a conductor or choreographer. Whether
over email or messaging or whatever else, the communications technology used to
transmit information during collaboration must specify the structure of
information but will neither make nor be able to make any assumptions about the
meaning of the information sent between collaborators.

Supplied with this distinction between technologies designed for
content-creation and those for communication, we are in a position to observe
that whatever feelings of technological globalization we detect in the present
moment are due almost exclusively the upswell of communications technologies
following from the advent of the consumer Internet. Surely it is not the
development of new scoring packages -- nor for that matter the development of
new publishing, analysis or design packages in the other disciplines -- that
provides the feelings of globalization attaching to the present moment.
Content-creation packages are defined in terms of the artifacts they help
create. But communications technologies have become such a pervasive part of
consumer experience in at least the rich economies precisely because they are
not constrained in any such way. The affect of technological globalization
results from communication and not from authorship.

The implications for composerly collaboration are clear. If our knowledge of
notated compositional practice in the first fifteen years of the present
century gives us any useful information, neither the newest of content-creation
technologies nor the newest communications technologies have made
composer-composer collaboration any more likely. Composers still find ourselves
embedded in networks of collaboration that are not distinguished in any
qualitatively different way than those of the past. Our collaborators are still
conductors, performers, dancers, choreographers, writers, actors and all the
rest. And we still find ourselves the lone node charged with writing music in
the graph of the network of collaborators. These are very much still cases of
transdisciplinary collaboration rather than composer-to-composer collaboration.
But what is markedly different in the present moment is the rate at which we
can communicate the details of work to our collaborators. Voice and video
calling, email and messaging accelerate communication internal to composerly
collaboration the same way they accelerate communication everywhere else. We
are, in effect, primarily the beneficiaries of innovations in technologies that
make no effort whatever to model our work as composers and as collaborative
artists: our communciation is faster than ever before but not because
computational technologies model our work in any substantially better way. We
are currently positioned at a moment where developments in the content-creation
technologies we use to produce the artifacts specific to our practice advance
only very slowly while the technologies we use to share the results of our work
continue to improve incredibly rapidly.

### ADDITIONAL COPY BELOW ###
#
#And we observe that this may be due in large measure to the fact that so many
#of the new technologies adhere unthinkingly to a split between content creation
#and communications. It is, after all, precisely when collaboration occurs that
#our distinction begins to blur, as collaborators need to communicate shared
#content. But new social media tools haven''t embedded robust models of musical
#notation. Nor have new content-creation tools embedded utilities for version
#tracking or comparison, let alone basics like user profiles that lend
#transparency to group work. Collaboration between workers with the same skills
#remains hellishly redundant. It speaks volumes of the metaphor "too many cooks
#in the kitchen" that one can simply imagine two cooks to meet the metaphor''s
#requirements. And it remains a major challenge of software systems to enable
#similarly skilled workers to collaborate on an artifact they each have been
#trained to create autonomously.
#
#Even though the ways that we each compose our music each makes heavy use of the
#tools of open-source development -- a number of different programming
#languages, integrated development environments, hosted repositories and a
#collection of unit and regression test practices, to name a few -- we are, in
#part, technoskeptics. In our work as developers of Abjad we are deeply
#committed to making the received cultural knowledge of more than 1000 years of
#music notation amenable to computation. But we do this not because of an
#interest in technology itself but as a way of helping streamline the sometimes
#incredibly detailed work of writing music. Consider the case of the composer
#realizing relatively late in the compositional process that hundreds of events
#in a complex musical texture must change in some systematic way as a result of
#a deeper listening to the inner ear and a developing understanding of the piece
#as it is being composed. Making such changes on paper is at least tedious and
#at worst an active deterrent to bettering the music. The situation with the
#available computer-based music notation programs is hardly any better. What is
#needed instead is a way systematically -- and indeed even syntactically -- to
#model the relationships between different events in even extremely complex
#musical score such that all events related in a musically meaningful way can be
#changed at once in response to the realizations (or imaginings) of the
#composer. This is one of the primary design imperatives of Abjad. But note that
#this sort of structural approach to modeling the relationships between entities
#in musical score derives not from new technologies but from old compositional
#problems: we chose to model our music with code because code helps clarify
#complex musical relationships in our music and thereby make musical
#relationships easier to elaborate as we compose. This is not a posture that
#derives from an interest in technology. And, in fact, if a
#non-computationally-oriented way of solving our compositional problems were
#available we would consider it immediately.