Prewriting
==========

Ways in which either music or composition are already collaborative. Ways in
which composers exist in ecologies of production. the work is fundamentally
collaboration. The rationalist impulse of the 20th century got excited about
changing that with the advent of electroacoustic music. That is now passed and
we have returned to a present moment where composition is inherently
collaborative.

Putting an intermediate graphic object between people is inherently
collaboration. A graphic object destined for interpretation over even vast
swaths of time. (Nelson Goodman and the distinction between autography and
allography. It would appear that allography is an indicator of the mandatory
need for collaboration.)

In this particular context, we are talking in a bounded way about collaboration
in the *creation* of the works of art.

When seen in this perspective, there is weird historical baggage that suggests
that content provided by the composer has primacy above content provided by the
performer. (Of course there are various ways that late-20th-century
developments problematize this historical baggage. It is no longer the case
that the rhythms of complexist music are transmitting exact performance
instructions. This would appear to be a late-20th-century shift in the
ontological status of the musical work. Is the work a repository that conveys
authorship? Or is the work an artifact that exists in the musical or cultural
ecology?)

### RESPONSES TO PROMPT ###

PROMPT: "Global interconnectedness and its tools reveal endless positions on
the stage of contemporary artistic creation: at one extreme we find the defense
of the creator’s lonely work process; on the other, the eminent search for
intersections that enable collaborative processes between artists from
different disciplines, fields and contexts."

Does global connectedness really "reveal endless positions on the stage of
contemporary artistic creation"? We can argue it does not. Why? Because the
interfaces to so many different software packages are essentially the same. We
express a core frustration with how few propositions have been made in the last
few decades.

Take workflows. We can think about this in terms of coupling workflows and
technologies throughout history? Hildegard: person talks about angels and
writes things down on parchement. At some point instruments: people at pianos
writing things down. Then weird one-off situations: Verdi attempts to get
people to collaborate on a piece; Mozart dies: somebody else completes a
requieum or an opera. (So "posthumous collaboration" has been a phenomenon.)

What about orchestration? Composers collaborate with orchestrators in the film
industry. What about before then? First orchestration course at the Paris
Conservatory was not taught until around the 1870s.

Can we think of collaboration as a type of crack in some edifice that has been
slowly spreading? Has the task of composition become too complicated to be
carried out by one person?

Why collaborate? What are the varous value propositions that collaboration
offers to composers throughout history? Efficiency? Mutuality of expertise: the
case in opera is clear: librettist, composer, impresario, and so on. The
conclusion here is that when we combine media then collaboration is taken as
necessary. But that when working within a single medium the need for
collaboration does not necessarily arise.

There are different types of collaborative process. Multiple people writing a
single score (which is extremely unusual). Can be editor or director working
together with a composer to tailor the parts of a score to a larger project:
this is the standard case film. In what contexts of music qua music do we find
the contexts of editorial oversight? There is the iterative relationship of
experiencing performances: Mahler used to site in the hall, listen to
rehearsals of his music and reorchestrate as he listened.

James Scott wrote "Seeing Like a State." The from-above rational planning
impulse. Certain schemes to improve the human condition have failed. Top-down
rationalist planning can only ever be parasitic on in-time métis. Consider the
work-to-rule strike: workers shut down a factory by rigorously following all
the rules they know about. Does this parallel the experiences Cage and Feldman
had when coaxing improvised materials from performers? Performance practice
suffuses the interpretation of any score.

PROMPT: "Both perspectives are valid and necessary for artistic creation, even
though hyperconnectivity allows us to take a glimpse, with genuine enthusiasm,
of new ways to explore reality through unusual horizons for human interaction."

Translation "boy it is really exciting to interact with people in new ways."

To what extent do we agree with the sentiment? Or with the enthusiasm of the
sentiment? What does hyperconnectivity get us? It gets us hyperconnectivity.
And then what?

Working collaboratively in the presence of a structure: the examples of
planning the through-time details of music: counterpoint, harmony, the
beginnings and endings of things. Whatever your medium, if you are working with
a team of people then the need for modeling things becomes essential. (Think
about the centrality of models in architecture.) In these cases then
collaborators are collaborating through the model, ie, through a structure. In
a Bruno Latour sense the model becomes an actor. Is this what Chaya and Steve
are getting at when they advise young composers to ask musical materials what
musical materials want.


###

Composers collaborate but it is frequently hidden: it is a problem that Hans
Zimmer is actually thirty people. In the visual arts the idea of the studio of
helpers was largely accepted. The same with architecture. But somehow not in
music.